mal-0440500 Abraham Lincoln papers: Series 1. General Correspondence. 1833-1916: Abraham Lincoln to Truman Smith, Saturday, November 10, 1860 (Lincoln will not issue a public statement to reassure the South) Abraham Lincoln Papers at the Library of Congress. Transcribed and Annotated by the Lincoln Studies Center, Knox College. Galesburg, Illinois. Selected and converted. American Memory, Library of Congress. Washington, DC, 1999. Preceding element provides place and date of transcription only. For more information about this text and this American Memory collection, refer to accompanying matter. Manuscript Division, Library of Congress. Copyright status not determined; refer to accompanying matter. The National Digital Library Program at the Library of Congress makes digitized historical materials available for education and scholarship. This transcription is intended to have an accuracy rate of 99.95 percent or greater and is not intended to reproduce the appearance of the original work. The accompanying images provide a facsimile of this work and represent the appearance of the original. 1999/05/20 0001 From Abraham Lincoln to Truman Smith 1 , November 10, 1860 1 See Smith to Lincoln, November 7, 1860, and Smith to Lincoln, November 8, 1860. Smith called Lincoln's attention to a circular distributed before the election by “respectable citizens of New York,” in which Lincoln was held up as a dangerous radical and an enemy of the institutions of the South and of the peace and security of the Union, whose policies were unsettling to the commercial life of the country. Such a message, typical as it was of the sort of vituperation a presidential candidate must endure, was especially unsettling in the current campaign, and would have a negative influence in the South as well as among Northern voters. Once elected, Smith asked, should Lincoln not speak out to “disarm the mischief makers, to allay causeless anxiety, to compose the public mind...?” (copy) Private & Confidential . Springfield Ill Nov 10th 1860. My dear Sir This is intended as a strictly private letter to you, and not as an answer to yours brought me by Mr. Sanford. 2 It is with the most profound appreciation of your motive, and highest respect for your judgment too, that I feel constrained, for the present, at least, to make no declaration for the public. 2 Smith's first letter to Lincoln, of November 7, 1860, was carried by Henry S. Sanford. See Smith to Lincoln, November 8, 1860. First, I could say nothing which I have not already said, and which is in print, and open for the inspection of all. To press a repetition of this upon those who have listened, is useless; to press it upon those who have refused to listen, and still refuse, would be wanting in self-respect, and would have an appearance of sycophancy and timidity, which would excite the contempt of good men, and encourage bad ones to clamor the more loudly. I am not insensible to any commercial or financial depression that may exist; but nothing is to be gained by fawning around the “ respectable scoundrels ” who got it up. Let them go to work and repair the mischief of their own making; and then perhaps they will be less greedy to do the like again. Yours very truly A. Lincoln.